---
title: "Minutes 2024-06-07"
date: 2024-06-07
---

::: {.callout-tip collapse="true"}
## View Attendee List

- Ben Straub (GSK)
- Eva Li
- Heidi Curinckx (Johnson & Johnson)
- HyeSoo Cho (FDA)
- Ismael Alejandro Rodriguez (Appsilon)
- Jane Owens (Phuse & Eli Lilly)
- Joel Laxamana (Roche/Genentech)
- Joseph Rickert (R Consortium)
- Lovemore Gakava (Novo Nordisk)
- Ning Leng (Roche/Genentech)
- Paul Schuette (FDA)
- Saghir Bashir (Argenx)
- Stephanie Lussier (Moderna)
- Steven Hasendinckx (Johnson & Johnson)
- YounKyeong Chang (FDA)
:::

The meeting was recorded and the [video](https://zoom.us/rec/share/cMcaFb0OOQmcFhdwktFrFu31Bd3ANXFm91ugZqe5WzRM0erMMzQVhYDBd1fa_Am8.ATQgpOrlYiLru6b4?startTime=1717776258000) is available.

## PharmaSUG Conference

* Both Ben Straub (Pilot 3) and Ismael Rodriguez (Pilot 4) gave talks at the recent [Pharma SUG](https://www.pharmasug.org/us/index.html) conference which was held in Baltimore.
* Both reported that there was a lot of interest in their talks
* Ben reported that he spoke to several people who thought the the FDA only approves SAS submissions.
* Both presentations will be placed in the R Submissions WG GitHub repository.

## Coordination with R Package Validation

* Ismael noted that Magnus from a package validation working group approached him about cooperating with the Submissions WG.
* JBR asked Ismael to ask Magnus to write to him and said that we be happy to invite Magnus to our meetings.


## Pilot 3

Hye Soo Cho and YounKyeong Chang provided an update on their review of the Pilot 3 submission.

* The FDA eviewers are wrapping up their review.
* There are no major issues.
* They were able to install the Util package from the zip file and review the R programs to drive the ADaM data sets.
* QC of the ADRG did turn up a minor issue regarding inconsistencies among three date variables.
  * The discussion of this issue begins at **7:55** in the video and is illustrated in the screen capture below.
  * The recommended solution is that the date origin should be specified in ISO 8601 date/time format in the ADRG.
  * Joel agreed to review the record of issues with Pilot 3 and see if there are any other parameters that ought to be explicitly mentioned in the ADRG.

![](dates.png)


## Pilot 4

Eric Nantz described progress on the Pilot 4 Submission.

* The end of June is still our target for the WebAssembly version of Pilot 4.
* The plan is to do the container version at a later time after the WebAssembly version has been reviewed.
* The question was asked if there are any special rules about package downloads.
 * Paul Schuette stated that downloading from CRAN is preferable, that in addition to the serialization FDA Security has mentioned downloads as a potential security problem, but that as far as he knows there are no regulations.
 * Eric pointed out that the Docker version of Pilot 4 also requires an image download.
 * Eric and Paul will meet to discuss this issue.
 * Eric will provide ADRG instructions and he and Paul will investigate,
* Paul noted that the FDA has recently approved WSL (Windows System Linux)

## ADRG

There has been discussion within the working group as to whether we should investigate best practices for writing ADRGs for R based submissions. JBR noted that recent comments in issue #112 suggested that we should coordinated with the PHUSE ADRG working group. Discussion begins at **29:00** into the video.

* As it turned out Jane Owens (Eli Lilly) who is co-lead of the PHUSE ADRG working group was on the call.
* PHUSE owns the ADRG templates
* They are actively working on updating the templates with respect to R in section 7.1 of the template.
* Pilot 3 has documentation on R packages in Section 7 and in an appendix to the ADRG (Section 9). 

![](ADRG.png)

* PHUSE got its starting point for updating the ADRG for R from J&J which Heidi Curinckx confirmed is based on J&J's participation in the Submissions WG.
* The PHUSE WG will publish their updated template and then send it out for review
* The Submissions WG and the PHUSE ADRG WG will cooperate and share information.
* JBR invited Jane and other members of her WG to attend future meetings.

## R Versions Blog Post

A small group led my Ning Leng is working on a blog post aimed at generating consensus about what versions of R might be appropriate for R based submissions at any point in time.

* The post has been revised to reelect the Submissions WG point of view and ends with a request for readers to comment in an issue that that we will open up on our GitHub repository.
* The post includes paragraphs on how four companies Roche, Lilly, GSK, Pfizer deal internally with versioning and package management issues
* Unfortunately, we must remove the quote from Paul because including it would require FDA approval.
* Will also remove the FDA logo.

**ACTION:**

* Ning and the other authors will finalize the text.
* JBR will send a MS word version of the post to Paul for final review.

## Next meeting

* Because the July meeting is scheduled on the US July 4th holiday weekend and because of travel to the useR! conference the July meeting will be cancelled. * The next meeting of the submissions WG will be at 9AM Pacific Time on Friday August 2, 2022.








